TITLE_FILE: El Agente An Autonomous Agent for Quantum
PAGES: 203

===== PAGE 1 =====
El Agente: An Autonomous Agent for Quantum
Chemistry
Yunheng Zou1,2, , Austin H. Cheng1,2,3, , Abdulrahman Aldossary2,3,†, Jiaru Bai3,†, , Shi Xuan
Leong3,†, , Jorge Arturo Campos-Gonzalez-Angulo2,3,§, , Changhyeok Choi3,§, Cher Tian Ser1,2,3,§, ,
Gary Tom1,2,3,§, , Andrew Wang3,§, , Zijian Zhang1,3, , Ilya Yakavets7, Han Hao7, Chris Crebolder1,7,
Varinia Bernales∗,3,7, , Alán Aspuru-Guzik∗,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,
1Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Sandford Fleming Building, 10 King’s
College Road, Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, Canada
2Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, 661 University Ave. Suite 710, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1,
Canada
3Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Lash Miller Chemical Laboratories, 80 St. George
Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3H6, Canada
4Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of Toronto, 184 College St., Toronto, ON
M5S 3E4, Canada
5Department of Chemical Engineering & Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, 200 College St.
Toronto, ON M5S 3E5, Canada
6Senior Fellow, Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR), 661 University Ave., Toronto,
ON M5G 1M1, Canada
7Acceleration Consortium, 700 University Ave., Toronto, ON M7A 2S4, Canada
8NVIDIA, 431 King St W #6th, Toronto, ON M5V 1K4, Canada
†Authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically
§Authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically
Computational chemistry tools are widely used to study the behaviour of chemical phenomena. Yet,
the complexity of these tools can make them inaccessible to non-specialists and challenging even for
experts. In this work, we introduceEl Agente Q, an LLM-based multi-agent system that dynamically
generates and executes quantum chemistry workflows from natural language user prompts. The system
is built on a novel cognitive architecture featuring a hierarchical memory framework that enables
flexible task decomposition, adaptive tool selection, post-analysis, and autonomous file handling and
submission. El Agente Qis benchmarked on six university-level course exercises and two case studies,
demonstrating robust problem-solving performance (averaging>87% task success) and adaptive error
handling throughin situ debugging. It also supports longer-term, multi-step task execution for more
complex workflows, while maintaining transparency through detailed action trace logs. Together,
these capabilities lay the foundation for increasingly autonomous and accessible quantum chemistry.
Date: May 6, 2025
Correspondence: varinia@bernales.org and aspuru@nvidia.com
KEYWORDS
LLM-based agent, computational chemistry automation, semi-empirical methods, density functional the-
ory (DFT), electronic structure, thermodynamic properties, organic molecules, inorganic complexes, high-
throughput virtual screening, agentic model.
1
arXiv:2505.02484v1  [cs.AI]  5 May 2025

===== PAGE 2 =====
INTRODUCTION
Computational chemistry is an essential tool in modern chemical research, allowing scientists to systematically
study diverse molecular systems, properties, and mechanisms (1; 2; 3; 4; 5). Simulation streamlines the design
of new drugs, catalysts, and materials by efficiently screening target molecules and reducing experimental
workload (6; 7; 8; 9; 10; 11; 12). In principle, simulation is also accessible to anyone with access to a computer.
Despite these advantages, computational chemistry software has long been known for its steep learning curve.
Users must possess expert knowledge to navigate a vast array of tools, configure input parameters, and
interpret results accurately. Additionally, handling computational divergences, runtime errors, and other
technical challenges demands significant expertise, making the field less accessible to non-specialists.
Moreover, these runtime errors can be challenging to understand even for experienced users and thus require
considerable time for troubleshooting calculations rather than focusing on scientific discovery. While integrated
workflows (13; 14; 15; 16; 17; 18; 19; 20; 21) and advanced interactive control (22; 23; 24; 25; 26) can alleviate
some of these challenges, they come with limitations of their own. These pipelines often rely on a fixed set of
tools and predefined workflows, which can be cumbersome when adapting to new problems or specific research
needs. For example, while calculating the ring strain of cycloalkanes involves a series of routine computational
chemistry protocols, like geometry generation, optimization, and obtaining appropriate energetic differences,
to our knowledge, there is no computational workflow specifically designed to calculate the ring strain of
cycloalkanes. Although modern workflow packages allow for adding such functionality, these workflows must
be implemented by experts, which makes scaling difficult for the diverse number of workflows a chemist might
need. Furthermore, a rigid workflow structure cannot generalize to complex cases that require domain-specific
chemical intuition in more advanced tasks. As a result, despite automation, such pipelines may still fall short
in facilitating truly accessible and adaptable computational chemistry workflows.
Large language models (LLMs) can be part of a potential solution to these problems (27; 28; 29; 30; 31; 32).
Through pre-training, LLMs not only encode chemistry knowledge in their training data (33; 34; 35; 36),
which is often derived from scientific literature and textbooks (37), but also gain the ability to interpret and
generalize human expertise stored in textual formats via in-context learning (38; 39; 40). This capability
enables the transfer of chemistry knowledge from experts to LLM-based systems through natural language
descriptions (41; 42). For instance, Jacobs and Pollice (32) recently demonstrated how an LLM can be
fine-tuned to emit complete ORCA input files in a single pass. Furthermore, recent advancements in
LLM-based agents allow LLMs to execute code and experiments based on this knowledge (43). Various
frameworks have been developed to enhance these agents with tools, memory, and human communication
interfaces (44; 45; 46; 47; 48; 49). LLM-based agents have shown promising results in retrieving chemistry
knowledge, designing and conducting experiments, and analyzing results (50; 51; 52). However, existing
approaches remain limited, often relying on a small set of tools and relatively simple experimental or
computational setups. This limitation stems in part from the significant human effort required to develop and
validate tools, as well as the challenge of selecting the appropriate tool from a large tool set. A key challenge,
therefore, is scaling these agent systems while minimizing the human effort needed to transfer and apply their
knowledge effectively.
In this work, we introduceEl Agente,1 a novel cognitive architecture for language agents, and apply it to
automate complex computational and quantum chemistry tasks. We refer to this application ofEl Agenteas
El Agente Q(Figure 1). El Agenteemploys a hierarchical network of specialized LLM-based agents, each
equipped with an extensive list of available tools. This hierarchy effectively filters out the irrelevant context
for each agent, significantly enhancing the decision-making performance of the entire system, enabling complex
planning and task execution via feedback loops. To minimize the human effort required for knowledge transfer,
we developed multiple interfaces allowing human experts to inject knowledge into the system through both
programming and natural language conversation.
El Agente Qis part of a broader trajectory of agentic systems in computational chemistry. Early rule-based
agents were used for modelling self-assembly (53; 54). More recently, agent-based systems have evolved
to incorporate knowledge graphs as structured data backends, enabling more semantic and interconnected
workflows (55; 56; 57; 58). Entering the LLM era, a new generation of agents has emerged across a broad
1Pronounced /el a’xente/, approximately "el ah-HEN-teh" in English. See audio: Zenodo (MP3).
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Figure 1 Schematic overview ofEl Agente Q, an LLM-based multi-agent system for automated planning, scheduling,
execution, and troubleshooting computational chemistry tasks. The hierarchical design allows the top-level agent (the
computational chemist) to focus on high-level planning. Meanwhile, lower-level agents (e.g., thegeometry optimization
module) specialize in executing their allotted tasks in the action space, calling software for action execution, or accessing
databases for information storage. The agent’s chatbox interface facilitates human-agent interaction through natural
language.
range of scientific tasks (59; 60; 61; 62; 63; 64; 65; 66; 67). For a comprehensive overview of these LLM-based
agentic systems, we refer the reader to Ref. (43). Specific applications of LLM-based agents in computational
chemistry include MDCrow (68) for molecular dynamics, and AutoSolvateWeb (69) for solvated molecules.
Our work builds on this growing landscape by focusing on a multi-agent system capable of simultaneously
coordinating several computational chemistry tasks. Unlike previous works,El Agente Qintroduces key
features such as automated error recovery, shell-level interaction, and action trace exports. Notably, it utilizes
LLMs to dynamically route tasks and tools, providing flexibility and adaptability that traditional workflow
management systems struggle to achieve.
This work showcases the agent network’s ability to perform various quantum chemistry calculations, including
geometry optimization, electronic structure analysis, and thermochemical property evaluation. These tasks
are performed by interfacing with various computational chemistry software packages and tools, including
RDKit (70), OpenBabel (71), xTB (72), and ORCA (73), as well as Architector (74). Furthermore,El Agente
Q can interface with SLURM, a job scheduler for UNIX clusters, to submit jobs, retrieve results, and run
Python scripts for I/O operations and data analysis. A key feature is its ability to extract the action traces of
the agents involved in its dynamic workflows, which can be exported as code to verify the correctness of the
procedure or assist humans in refined workflow design. This feature allowsEl Agente Qto be used as a tool
for human experts, enabling them to leverage its capabilities while maintaining control and oversight over the
computational process.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. We begin by describing the system architecture ofEl
Agente, including the specialized agents and integrated tools that formEl Agente Q. Next, we present a series
of eight computational chemistry tasks the system has successfully completed, highlighting its capabilities
and reliability. We then explore its error recovery mechanisms and adaptability to novel situations. Finally,
we reflect on the roadmap for future developments in agentic AI for computational chemistry, including its
integration into real-world applications and self-driving laboratories, the role of the human teaching processes,
and the limitations and challenges to be addressed.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
RESUL TS
System architecture: El Agente
El Agenteis the novel cognitive architecture, which we used as the foundation to developEl Agente Q. El
Agente was designed to improve the agents’ planning, reasoning, and long-term acting capability. It integrates
a working memory, a long-term memory, and an LLM-based reasoning core, following the CoALA agent
design framework (75) and the Soar architecture (76; 77). Specifically, our implementation transforms and
extends the original CoALA architecture into a hierarchical cybernetic agentic network to enable hierarchical
planning, long-term memory retrieval, and modular memory management. The working memory is updated
through four components: (i) theglobal memory, which maintains shared context across all agents; (ii) an
agent-specific conversation history, which tracks local decision-making and interactions; (iii) agrounding
mechanism, which brings in environment information such as file directory tree structure to allow the agent to
perceive the working environment; and (iv) along-term memory, which is composed of procedural, semantic,
and episodic memory, to define the expert agent’s behaviour (Figure 2). The LLM reasoning core then utilizes
the specialized working memory to plan, reason, act, critique, and report task execution in real time, enabling
flexible, dynamic synthesis and execution of complex, multi-step workflows.
In particular, the procedural memory is represented as a hierarchical multi-agent team working in a cybernetic
network fashion to generate procedures dynamically (Figure 2-iv). Within the hierarchical team, each agent
(a node in the procedural memory) is equipped with four components: (i) aspecialized contextthat defines
its role and job scope, and contains domain-specific knowledge, (ii) its ownsemantic memory, which stores
role-specific patterns and decision rules that can be dynamically retrieved, enabling consistent expert-like
reasoning, (iii) a set ofcallable modules (i.e. connections between nodes) that enable the agent to either
interface directly with available tools for task execution or delegate subtasks to other agents, allowing for
dynamic task decomposition and routing across the network. The callable modules follow common procedural
task decomposition logic to organize the agents into a hierarchical team. The last component (iv) is the
agent’s individualepisodic memorythat captures prior decisions and results. However, episodic memory is
not activated in our current implementation ofEl Agente Q.
Figure 2 A high-level view of the cognitive architecture ofEl Agente, where the working memory is composed of (i) a
global memory, (ii) anagent-specific conversation history, (iii) agrounding mechanism, and (iv) retrievedlong-term
memory, all of which go into theLLM reasoning core. The long-term memory is composed of procedural, semantic,
and episodic memory. The procedural memory itself is a procedural memory network consisting of a network structure
and a procedural memory node. Each procedural memory node makes the reasoning core aware of its current role,
semantic memory, episodic memory, and allowable action space, which are processed as part of the working memory.
Note that inEl Agente Q, the episodic memory has been disabled.
Throughout a session,El Agente Qrecords its action trace. The system can export this trace to a Jupyter
notebook, where the tools invoked by the agents are converted into native Python functions. This functionality
allows users to review the steps taken by the agents to complete a task. This feature is particularly useful for
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
human experts to verify the correctness of the procedure. Crucially, users can also adapt these notebooks into
standardized workflow pipelines for high-throughput virtual screening.
Implementation of El Agente for quantum chemistry tasks: El Agente Q
El Agente Q (Figure 3) features the computational chemist agent as the top-level agent for high-level
planning based on the user’s task prompt. Thecomputational chemistis assisted by mid-level agents, which
can be broadly categorized into three functional modules based on overarching job scope. These modules are
analogous to a company’s departments, in the sense that they have well-defined functions that contribute to
the overall function of a complex system. These modules are (i) thegeometry module, which manages tasks
like molecular structure construction and geometry optimization, (ii) thequantum calculation module, which
performs all calculation-related tasks such as preparing and running executable input files and debugging
output files, and (iii) thefile I/O module, which manages file system operations such as reading and extracting
properties from output files, as well as job submission.
Each agent determines its next callable module based on its domain-specific knowledge. These modules
include tool selection and task delegation logic (e.g., when to use RDKit versus OpenBabel for thegeometry
generation agent), expert-recommended typical action sequences (e.g., geometry optimization→frequency
analysis), expected input and output file formats, common output handling heuristics (e.g., detecting and
resolving imaginary frequencies after optimization), and subtask delegation. For example, density functional
theory (DFT) calculations are managed by theDFT agent, which can call theinput file expertto generate
ORCA input files, and theSLURM agentto submit ORCA calculations.
Within such a hierarchical planning framework, higher-level agents only handle broad strategic planning,
directing low-level agents to manage execution details, who respond with summarized feedback. For example,
when instructed to perform a DFT calculation, theDFT agentonly generates high-level subtasks such as
generating input files, organizing job folders, and submitting calculations. Lower-level implementation details -
such as deciding the keywords and blocks required for ORCA input file creation, writing the Python command
to execute the file organization, and interfacing with the HPC server - are delegated to one of the following
agents: theORCA input file expert, thefile I/O agent, and theORCA runner. Similarly, these individual
agents only provide concise, high-level feedback to theDFT agentwithout overwhelming the higher-level agent
with implementation specifics. This Markov-style thinking process effectively reduces the planning complexity
to improve instruction adherence, enhances local problem-solving ability, and shortens the active context
for individual agents, which allowsEl Agente Qto act over longer timescales and solve complex, multi-step
quantum chemistry tasks (discussed further in Strength 2: Scalability for long-term acting computational
tasks).
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Figure 3 Hierarchical architecture ofEl Agente Q. Inter-agent communication is illustrated with black arrows, where
solid arrows represent task delegation from higher-level agents, and dotted arrows indicate feedback and reporting
from lower-level agents. The agents can be broadly categorized into three functional modules - thegeometry module
(coral), thequantum calculation module(blue), and thefile I/O module(yellow). Each module can be thought of
as a department in a complex organization with its own manager, employees, and tools (violet). For example, the
geometry generation agentgets to decide if the system should be handled by theorganometallic complexes agentor
Perplexity AI search (78), and decide the charge and multiplicity of the system.
University-level exercises
We benchmarkedEl Agente Qon a set of university-level exercises (79). These exercises cover three core
computational categories of tasks that are time-consuming yet commonly encountered: geometry optimization,
thermodynamic stability, and electronic structure analysis. To assess the capacity for autonomous problem-
solving, we framed each exercise as a chemical problem rather than a direct computational instruction in our
query prompts (individual query prompts provided in Benchmark Studies). This framework was designed to
evaluate its ability to reason through chemical problems and independently select appropriate computational
methods and tools for each unique exercise, rather than follow fixed workflows. For example, in Exercise 5,
we asked the agent to determine the pKa of carboxylic acid without explicitly asking it to compute the Gibbs
free energy of the deprotonation reaction. Table 1 outlines the tasks, examples of tested systems, and the
anticipated challenges associated with each task. All our evaluations are run in fully autonomous mode, with
only one input from the user, although in practical use cases,El Agente Qcan be highly interactive at all
hierarchies.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Table 1 Summary of university-level exercises, including the task description, some examples of tested chemical systems,
and challenges expected.
Task Description
Organic
compounds
Task: Optimize molecules from chemical names and generate a report of: geometry, point group
symmetry, dipole moment, molecular orbital analysis, HOMO-LUMO gap, various atomic charges,
and a visualized image of the molecule.
Systems: The test set includes acetaminophen, 2-chloronitrobenzene, (S)-2-ethyl-2-fluoropentan-1-ol,
and L-histidine.
Anticipated challenges: Generating the correct structures from names and SMILES, and extracting and
reporting data correctly.
Inorganic
compounds
Task: Optimize molecules from chemical names and generate a report similar to the organic molecules
exercise.
Systems: The test set includes dicyanoaurate, cyclohexyldimethylphosphine, perchlorate, and chromium
hexacarbonyl.
Anticipated challenges: Generating the correct structures from names and SMILES. Using only SMILES
can be trickier for hypervalent complexes, ensuring that the geometry corresponds to an energy
minimum. Similar to the organic compounds, extracting data and reporting.
Relative
stability of
carbocations
Task: Compute ∆G and ∆H for R–H− − →R+ +H –.
Systems: The test set includes toluene, propene, and 2-methylpropane.
Anticipated challenges: Generating geometries of carbocations is non-trivial because they violate
octet rules for valency. Removing the correct hydrogen to yield the most stable carbocation can be
challenging.
Ring strain of
cycloalkanes
Task: Compute ∆G and ∆H of ring strain due to cyclization: Cyclo(CnH2n) → Cyclo(Cn−1H2n−3)-
CH3.
Systems: The test set includesn = 3 − 8.
Anticipated challenges: Correctly optimizing the geometry, keeping track of multiple files, and analyzing
correctly.
pKa of
common
acids
Task: Compute the pKa of carboxylic acids,H–A− − →H++A–, with Gibbs energies computed using
an implicit solvent. The proton solvation energy may be calibrated against literature pKa values of
related carboxylic acids.
Systems: This is tested for either acetic or chlorofluoroacetic acid.
Anticipated challenges: Keeping track of multiple files, long-term planning of multiple steps.
Absorption
spectrum of
organic
molecules
Task: Calculate the singlet (including the oscillator strength) and the singlet-triplet gap of vertical
excitation energy of organic molecules with time-dependent density functional theory. The geometries
are provided for the agent.
Systems: The test set includes three organic molecules.
Anticipated challenges: Reporting the summary of the results in a table.
Evaluation of El Agente Q’s problem-solving ability
To systematically assessEl Agente Q’s performance, we defined two difficulty levels for each exercise in terms
of the level of detail for the provided description. Broadly speaking, a more guided setting for the first level
was provided, where prompts include explicit hints or supporting information or involve fewer molecules. In
contrast, the second level presents a more open-ended challenge, where prompts either are concise and offer
minimal guidance or require performing higher-volume tasks across numerous molecules. These higher-volume
tasks stress-test the network’s coordination efficiency and long-term acting capability. Each exercise at both
difficulty levels was repeated ten times with identical prompts to evaluate reliability. We note that the prompts
specify the choice of basis set and density functional to allow for a consistent assessment of accuracy and
reliability. The success rate is defined as the percentage of successful runs out of these 10 trials (the rubrics
for each exercise can be found in Table S8, while all generated files can be found in a data repository (80)).
Across all university-level exercises,El Agente Qachieved an average success rate of >88.8% and >87.6% for
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
first- and second-level difficulties, respectively, demonstrating strong generalization across a wide diversity of
chemical problems (Table 2). These results highlight its potential as a reliable quantum chemistry assistant
that can reason through varied chemical queries, plan and execute appropriate computational workflows,
and adapt to varied input file formats and job execution requirements. We further investigate the sources
of performance variability across runs in the Limitations section. These failure modes, in turn, will help us
inform the immediate development plans (see El Agente’s Roadmap).
Table 2 Success rates ofEl Agente Qtested on university-level quantum chemistry exercises. The success rate is
defined as the percentage of successful runs out of the total number of runs (10), with standard deviation indicated
with ±. The difficulty levels are described in the table. The number of molecules (provided as SMILES or in XYZ
format) involved in some tasks is given in parentheses. For the detailed score of each session, refer to Table S3.
# Exercise Difficulty Success%
1 Organic compounds
Level 1: Fewer molecules; SMILES (3) are provided. 88 ± 10%
Level 2: The XYZ files (20) with chemical names, charge, and spin multi-
plicity are provided.
78 ± 17%
2 Inorganic compounds
Level 1: Fewer molecules; SMILES (3) are provided. 78 ± 9%
Level 2: The XYZ files (16) with chemical names, charge, and spin multi-
plicity are provided.
84 ± 7%
3 Relative stability of
carbocations
Level 1: XYZ files (19) are provided, with hints about charge and spin
multiplicity.
83 ± 18%
Level 2: SMILES (18) are provided for all species except the hydride,
including charges but not spin multiplicity.
92 ± 13%
4 Ring strain of
cycloalkanes
Level 1: Query includes SMILES (2) as a hint to generate the remaining
eight compounds, step-by-step ring strain calculation procedures, and actual
reference point.
94 ± 7%
Level 2: Query only includes hints of reference point and ring strain calcula-
tion procedure.
77 ± 11%
5 pKa of common
acids
Level 1: Calculate only the pKa of acetic acid. 90 ± 16%
Level 2: Calculate proton solvation free energy by calibrating against
literature pKa values, and subsequently calculate pKa of chlorofluoroacetic
acid.
95 ± 16%
6 Absorption spectrum
of organic molecules
Level 1: Query includes the XYZ files (3) and hints about the excited triplet
states calculation and where to find the results.
100 ± 0%
Level 2: Query is concise, includes the XYZ files (3), and does not provide
any hints.
100 ± 0%
Adaptive troubleshooting and error handling
El Agente Qdemonstrates robustin situ debugging and adaptive error recovery during workflow execution,
actively iterating to correct both input file issues and output-related failures. When input file errors arise, the
agent can detect and correct non-executable or invalid job configurations by routing feedback through the
agent hierarchy and retrying job submission (Figure 3). For example, in the calculation of absorption spectra
of organic molecules (Exercise 6),El Agente Qsuccessfully resolved ORCA runtime errors triggered by
hallucinated non-existent ORCA keywords such asDOSINGLET, DOTRIPLET, andNROOTS_TRIPLET,
autonomously removing or replacing them (Session TDDFTforS1andT1_level2_10). In another case, the
agent initially failed to specify the correct XYZ input file for one of the runs in the pKa exercise (Exercise
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
5), which caused errors during batch submission (Session pKaOfCarboxylicAcidsAndMethods_level2_-
3). El Agente Q automatically recovered from this error and adapted its strategy by switching to a
one-at-a-time submission strategy. These examples highlight the agent’s adaptive troubleshooting capacity
and ability to refine its computational plan in response to failed or invalid configurations. They also
demonstrate the network’s internal critic mechanism, enabled by its hierarchical design. Regarding output
troubleshooting, El Agente Qcan handle undesirable behaviours such as the presence of imaginary frequencies.
For instance, in the ring strain exercise (Exercise 4), when structure generation tools produced a planar
geometry instead of the correct puckered conformation for cyclobutane, the imaginary frequency removal
module accurately diagnosed the presence of imaginary frequencies, identified the underlying structural issue,
and triggered re-runs by displacing the structure along the displacement modes to successfully re-optimize
to the true minimum-energy structure (Session RingStrainEnergies_level2_9. In the carbocation exercise
(Exercise 3), we also consistently observed the automatic correction of imaginary frequencies for several
carbocation structures (i.e., the carbocation of propane and 2-methylpropane). Additionally, we observe that
El Agente Qactively iterates to debug and resolve energy convergence issues during geometry optimizations
(Session OrganicMoleculesGeometryOptimizationAndProperties_level1_4).
From Theory to Practice—El Agente Q in Real-World Scenarios
In this section, we evaluateEl Agente Q’s ability to tackle computational tasks of increased complexity
through two case studies. In the first one,El Agente Qis tasked with investigating how water as a solvent
affects an amino acid’s IR spectrum using both implicit and explicit models. In the second, it is asked
to perform the automated generation and optimization of a lanthanoid complex, guided by details from a
published computational methodology. These examples highlight the model’s robustness and relevance for
real-world scientific applications.
Case study 1: Influence of Solvent on IR Spectra
In this study, we evaluatedEl Agente Q’s capability to model solvent effects on vibrational spectra—a
nuanced and computation-intensive task in theoretical chemistry. The exercise was adapted from a YouTube
tutorial (81), and involved calculating the vibrational frequencies of alanine in three distinct environments:
(1) the gas phase, (2) implicit solvation using the CPCM model (82) with water, and (3) explicit solvation
with 12 water molecules combined with CPCM.El Agente Qwas expected to generate molecular geometries,
prepare accurate input files using DFT, and extract key vibrational frequencies (C––O and O–Hstretches) to
assess solvent-induced shifts.
El Agente Qperformed effectively across all stages. It successfully built the complex alanine–water cluster
via OpenBabel, pre-optimized the structure with xTB, and performed geometry optimization and frequency
analysis using the requested level of theory. Interestingly, El Agente Q allocated 8, 16, and 24 cores
to the gas-phase, CPCM, and explicit-CPCM hybrid models, respectively, reflecting an awareness of the
increasing system complexity. This behaviour indicatesEl Agente Q’s ability to allocate computational
resources efficiently within the limits of a 48-core node, and optimize parallel performance. The extracted
vibrational frequencies closely approach reference values from the benchmark (81), indicating that the overall
computational workflow was reliably reproduced. Impressively,El Agente Qalso automatically generated
a comparative IR spectrum combining results from the aforementioned calculation models, with visually
highlighted characteristic absorption bands, including 1770–1850 cm−1 (C––O stretching region), 2800–3100
cm−1 (C–Hstretching modes), and 3300–3800 cm−1 (N–Hand O–Hstretching region) (see SI: Influence of
solvent on IR Spectra). SinceEl Agente Qassigned peaks in the spectrum based on characteristic frequency
ranges, the significantly red-shiftedO–Hstretching peak of alanine in the hybrid solvation model (2991 cm−1)
was grouped within theC–Hstretching region, and theO–Hstretching vibrations from both alanine and
water molecules were classified into a single group. Nevertheless, our system reproduced the key qualitative
trend—a red shift in bothC––O and O–Hstretches due to solvation—with clear reasoning linked to hydrogen
bonding effects, demonstrating both technical reliability and chemical insight.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Case study 2: Lanthanoid Complex
In general, lanthanoid complexes present a significant challenge in computational chemistry due to their
intricate electronic structures, frequent open-shell character, and the necessity of using effective core potentials.
As such, accurate modelling of their properties often demands specialized methods and careful control over
convergence settings. In this study, we evaluateEl Agente Q’s ability to autonomously carry out a high-
fidelity quantum chemical workflow on a Ce(III) complex containing three bidentate nitrate ligands and three
coordinated water molecules. We also assess its capacity to extract and apply methodological details from the
literature by prompting it with the computational procedure used to generate the Ln-QM dataset, as reported
by Hölzer et al. (83) (exactly as it was described in the manuscript, see SI: Lanthanoid Complex). Although
the protocol was provided in a single prompt, it requiredEl Agente Qto execute a series of interdependent
steps.
As a first step,El Agente Qutilized the Architector library (74) to generate initial geometries, showcasing its
ability to integrate with community-developed tools for building organometallic structures. As the Architector
library is likely not part of the training corpus of the LLMs, we developed ametal complex generation
agent to call Architector’s functions appropriately, which is called by thegeometry generation agent(Figure
2). After successfully generating five geometrical isomers, it optimized each, ensuring consistent treatment
across all calculations. During the DFT calculations, the system autonomously corrected, through iterative
refinement, several input-related errors that were encountered, such as the misplacement of SCF keywords
and unsupported density functional options.
For this study, geometry optimizations converged for all isomers, and two cases involving imaginary frequencies
were handled appropriately: both were re-optimized until the imaginary frequencies were eliminated entirely
up to a threshold of 15 cm−1. Although geometry optimization was conducted using dispersion-corrected
DFT, only the DFT energies were reported, but the energies associated with the dispersion corrections were
not extracted. Nevertheless, the final single-point energies calculated using a different functional and the
corresponding relative energies for the isomers were computed and reported correctly.
This case study demonstratesEl Agente Q’s ability to extract computational workflows from the literature
to perform high-throughput quantum chemical calculations involvingf-block systems—a capability readily
extendable to a broad range of metal complexes. This study is an example ofEl Agente Q’s capacity to
carry out calculations with minimal human intervention, combining intelligent error handling with seamless
integration of external tools for molecular structure generation and simulation. Moving forward,El Agente
Q will be further refined to incorporate chemical intuition for selecting more accurate methods, including
appropriate treatments of effective core potentials, spin–orbit coupling, and SCF (internal) stability checks.
We anticipate that its troubleshooting capabilities will support the reliable convergence of complexes with
increasingly challenging electronic wavefunctions. Data extraction failures, such as the omission of DFT
dispersion data extraction in this run, will be corrected in future versions with more specialized and robust
extraction modules and scripting tools.
DISCUSSION
We will begin this section by describing three strengths ofEl Agentebefore discussing its limitations and our
future roadmap. We end this section with the conclusion about our study.
Strength 1: Potential to synthesize workflows
El Agente Qcan automatically design workflows to achieve a specified scientific target. Within each workflow,
there are decision-making and action steps. The agentic nature of our system enables it to make decisions
dynamically, exploring different action sequences following best domain practices to achieve the desired
objective(s). Once these action sequences are consolidated—by removing the often present trial-and-error
steps—they can be reused as rigid workflows without agentic decision-making, for example, for applying them
to high-throughput settings. Therefore,El Agente Q’s task execution can be viewed as a search over the
space of potential computational workflows. The six benchmark exercises involved an average of 64.5 actions
and 103.9 agent interactions (commanding and reporting) per exercise (Tables S4, S5), demonstrating the
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
complexity of the synthesized workflows. This capability enables efficient discovery of feasible workflows
for high-throughput tasks and the reproduction of experiments from loosely defined instructions, with the
potential to significantly reduce human workload by accommodating software-specific input requirements and
uncovering missing details that typically require intensive tuning.
Strength 2: Scalability for long-term acting computational tasks
Another key strength ofEl Agente Qis its capacity to operate as a long-term autonomous system, capable of
executing extended, multi-step tasks that involve numerous calculations, tool calls, and iterative decision-
making in our benchmark exercises. The hierarchical task decomposition in our system architecture enables
this long-term acting capability. Instead of requiring a single agent to reason and complete the task within its
context window, our underlying architecture decomposes the complex task into smaller, manageable subtasks,
each assigned to specialized agents. This assignment happens recursively until it reaches the bottom layer of
the network.
In our design, the maximum depth from thecomputational chemistto the lowest level agent is six, which
means that at some step, the low-level agent is processing a subtask that is decomposed six times from the
main objective. This modular, hierarchical structure enables the overall system to maintain coherence and
continuity even as the total task context exceeds the native token limits of any individual model. For example,
for theRelativeStabilitiesOfCarbocations_level2_1 session, El Agente Qspends 3.2 million total tokens
and 112 actions. By the end of the session, the final context length summed across all agents reached 204,789
tokens, which exceeds Claude 3.7’s 200K window for a single agent. Due to the hierarchy in our framework, the
computational chemist, our highest level agent, only consumes 19,855 tokens during the entire task, which
is just 10% of the maximum context window (Tables S6, S7). Consequently,El Agente Qcan continually
function well after this task due to the low cognitive load. Its hierarchical working memory management,
adaptive troubleshooting, and error handling capacity are crucial for scalingEl Agente Qto more complex
quantum chemistry workflows.
Strength 3: Efficiency and user accessibility
El Agente Qis a user-friendly tool that requires only a natural language prompt to define the compounds
and reactions, and state the type of calculations required. By lowering the knowledge barrier for planning
computational workflows and using computational chemistry and cheminformatics packages,El Agente
Q makes these calculations more accessible to a much broader set of practitioners, including students or
experimental research chemists with no programming knowledge. At the same time,El Agente Q’s ability to
export full action traces ensures transparency and traceability by allowing users to review the agents’ decision-
making process and validate the outcomes. This feature improves trust inEl Agente Q’s results. Additionally,
El Agente Q significantly saves human time by automating tedious steps, such as the preprocessing of
input files, setting up calculation parameters, and managing the job queue according to the progress of the
calculations and computation resources.
Strength 4: Orthogonality to model capability and reasoning frameworks
El Agentecognitive architecture is orthogonal to the underlying LLM’s capability and the external reasoning
frameworks applied during inference. Improvements in model capability, such as stronger priors or fine-tuning,
and reasoning strategies like chain-of-thought prompting (84) or voting-based methods (e.g., Tree of Thoughts
(85)) can enhance the quality of local decision-making and instruction following at the node level. For instance,
during initial system development, we observed higher performance gains after switching from non-reasoning
models to reasoning-capable models like Claude 3.7, particularly in tasks requiring the model to reason with
given context.El Agentecomplements these model improvements by leveraging its hierarchical structure to
reduce cognitive load at each expert node, allowing the reasoning core to focus on the most relevant context,
enabling both the model and the applied reasoning framework to perform closer to their optimal potential.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Limitations
WhileEl Agente Qdemonstrates strong overall performance, we discuss some sources of performance variability
that we observed (Table 2).
First, one issue is incomplete or missing final reports and/or property extractions during post-computation
analysis, particularly for larger parallel batches of longer calculations. For example, in the geometry optimiza-
tion of organic compounds (Exercise 1), none of the first-level calculations reports were missing, while 24.5%
(49 out of 200) of the reports for second-level calculations were missing. In the case of inorganic compounds
(Exercise 2), only 1.3% (2 out of 160) of the reports for second-level calculations were missing, and this
was due to issues encountered while optimizing the XeF4 geometry. Calculations for the organic molecules
required significantly longer runtimes when compared to inorganic molecules, with most compounds containing
about 20 atoms. Among the reports generated for Exercises 1 and 2,El Agente Qwas also penalized for
not including one or two requested properties in the final report. This penalization was the primary factor
contributing to the scores presented in Table 2, as we applied strict scoring criteria. Importantly, we found
that this issue is resolved by issuing a simple follow-up query prompt to generate the analysis reports after
completing the calculations. This finding highlights that the failure did not stem from an inability to perform
the calculations and their corresponding analyses, and thatEl Agente Qcould benefit from an additional
dedicated post-analysis module integrated into the existing hierarchy, and better output file parsing tools.
Another source of performance variability is the model’s tendency to make unverified assumptions if the pro-
vided information is incomplete. For instance, in the pKa benchmark exercise (Exercise 5), the model directly
applied empirical corrections using arbitrary scaling values to adjust computed pKa values (Session pKaOfCar-
boxylicAcidsAndMethods_level1_6). In one of the runs on the relative stabilities of carbocations (Exercise
3), following an incorrect/missing calculation for the enthalpy and Gibbs energies of the hydride anion, the
agent approximated the enthalpy as -0.5 Hartree based on the statistical mechanics of an ideal gas, instead
of resubmitting the DFT calculation at the specified level of theory (Session RelativeStabilitiesOfCarboca-
tions_level2_4). Nonetheless, traceability and interpretability are preserved through our detailed action
trace logs and conversation history that capture all model decisions, allowing users to catch these assumptions.
Future improvements, such as more interactive clarification prompts and multimodal verification strategies,
are outlined in El Agente’s Roadmap and will further enhance output reliability while balancing user oversight
and system autonomy. These behaviours could also be mitigated through alternative prompting strategies,
such as explicitly instructing the agent to refrain from making assumptions, or adjusting the model’s prior,
such as through reinforcement learning from human feedback (86).
A further limitation lies in the reliability of geometry generation from compound names or SMILES strings.
The external tools to whichEl Agente Qhas current access (e.g., OpenBabel or RDKit) do not always
generate conformationally stable or chemically reasonable structures. This constraint arises from the inherent
limitations of the current geometry generation tools rather than the agentic framework. An interactive mode,
where the users can inspect, draw, or modify the generated structures beforeEl Agente Qproceeds, can
potentially mitigate this issue. The interactive format inherently comes with a trade-off on the system’s
autonomy. Expanding El Agente Q’s access to more diverse structure generation tools with multimodal
capabilities could also enhance reliability. Plans to implement these system upgrades are detailed in El
Agente’s Roadmap.
Additionally, the system architecture involved careful manual design of the agent hierarchy to address early
multi-agent coordination failures (87), taking into account the tools’ availability and model limitations. For
instance, when we experimented with lightweight LLMs during early development stages ofEl Agente Q,
without specifying explicit constraints, thegeometry optimization agentmight proceed in the absence of
a valid initial geometry. Other failure modes, such as loss of details during message passing, also required
further tuning of the message passing and global memory construction policies. These experiences highlight
the need for robust orchestration strategies, such as internal validation and pre-condition checks, to ensure
reliable behaviour across models with varying capabilities. These safeguards will be critical for scaling under
resource constraints, e.g., when one desires to employ lightweight LLMs. A promising direction is to allowEl
Agente Qto learn and adopt these safeguards autonomously through its episodic memory.
Despite these challenges,El Agente Qrepresents a promising step toward automating traditionally manual
and expertise-heavy aspects of computational chemistry, such as recovering from execution errors or generating
12

